hi I'm Bill Kennedy and welcome back to
my football mentor.com I want to answer
a question we've had from one of the
people that have viewed our videos on
throwing mechanics and this question
strikes near and dear to my heart
because I used to do this as a
quarterback the question was this young
man when he throws a football the spin
is tight the trajectory is good but the
football actually begins to turn in the
air and if you've never experienced that
as a quarterback just wait it'll happen
to you I want to show you mechanically
why that happens when I would throw it
that way in high school my receivers
would tell me hey I like that thing that
you throw that turns this way and I said
well I'm really not trying to do that
I'd rather the ball be pointed over and
that's much easier to catch in the
release as in the carriage of the ball
I'd like the back of my throwing hand
that wrist area to be flat if it begins
to do this and I'm going to tell you
this almost always happens to baseball
football combination guys because
anytime we throw a curveball we get this
if you were a golfer we'd call that a
cupped wrist anytime you cup your wrist
and you lose this vertical plane your
hand turns under the ball and when we
release it and let go instead of it
being linear force the force ends up
being across the ball from right to left
so the ball will start straight but as
it loses speed and falls out of the air
it will turn the same way my hand turned
when I got under the ball now there's a
great drill and you maybe you want to do
this against a stucco wall and then you
won't forget the drill you stand as
close to that stucco wall as you can so
it's right here and you throw making
sure that as you load the ball and start
your throwing motion that your elbow
gets out here when you release it not
this way you'll skin this
enough time to figure it out and if your
hand goes this way as you start to throw
you'll skin all these knuckles do do
that two or three times pretty soon you
figure out how to stay tight with the
ball elbow first out back of the left
wrist or right wrist I'm sorry flat once
you're in this position and we let go of
the ball I've had all kinds of questions
about what should my hand look like
after I let it go should it go this way
should it go this way once the ball is
gone and we started with this and our
index fingers the last thing off the
ball and our motion is linear in this
case in terms of the direction of the
throw the spin should stay 612 the point
of the ball on each end should be going
this way if that hand gets under and
your hand goes across the ball will turn
point out haven't had many where the
point turned in you'd have to be a
pretty good curveball pitcher to do that
but that's a very common question that I
get normally we can solve it in about
three minutes with a quarterback just
have somebody stand right up next to
them so that they have to keep the ball
here and when they finish that throw I
think you can solve that problem now I
made reference to linear linear meaning
straight line I don't think I've
probably said this in the other videos
throwing motion is not a linear action
there's a part of it that traces a
straight line but the real force at work
here is rotational force where my
shoulders are here the ball is loaded
and as I turn it's like a boxer throwing
a punch I'm here this elbow works down
at my side and it looks a little bit
like a ferris wheel but this is the part
that determines the spin of the ball
don't get it under here keep it flat see
you next time